Whether you’re heading for the KwaZulu-Natal coast, the Garden Route, the Mother City or your backyard in good ol’ Joburg, the FM has a list of things you’ll want to do this holiday. Amuse the kids, take a break from the in-laws, be entertained — there’s a good mix of outings to pick from. CAPE TOWN Jeremy Loops and Crimson House at Kirstenbosch See out 2018 on the lawns at Kirstenbosch enjoying the music of Jeremy Loops and rock-blues band Crimson House. Take your picnic basket and ease into the new year. Venue: Kirstenbosch National Botanical GardenCost: R415Date: December 31sanbi.org Picture Theory: David Goldblatt Exhibition The great photographer, who died this year, captured key moments and everyday life in SA for more than 60 years. This exhibition lets his pictures speak for themselves, allowing viewers to make their own interpretations of life through his lens. The film Goldblatt (directed by Daniel Zimbler, 2017) is also on show along with a selection of texts and workshops, seminars, residencies and a reading room. Venue: A4 Arts FoundationCost: FreeDates: Until January 19a4arts.org Spier’s Festival of Light Art Sound and light sculptures will be delighting guests after dark at Spier this festive season. The mix of light installations, music and this idyllic setting makes for a magical festive outing. Book a ready-made picnic or create your own from the deli and enjoy the beautiful surrounds before the sun sets. Venue: Spier Wine EstateCost: Free entryDates: Until January 30spier.co.za Zip Zap Circus at the Waterfront The Zip Zap Circus School will be wowing the crowds in the amphitheatre at the V&A Waterfront every day from 5pm. Be amazed at the juggling, jumping, climbing and acrobatic skills of professional and student performers from this nonprofit organisation. Venue: Silo District, V&A WaterfrontCost: FreeDates: January 2 to 8waterfront.co.za JOBURG Janice Honeyman’s ‘Snow White’ See Desmond Dube, John Robbie and Ben Vos ham it up in Honeyman’s Christmas panto. It’s full of all the good stuff – silly laughs, song and dance, sensational sets and a timeless story with a modern twist. Venue: Mandela Theatre, Joburg TheatreCost: R245-R375Dates: Until December 23 Pieter Toerien’s ‘A Christmas Carol’ Don’t miss out on this multimedia interpretation of Charles Dickens’s classic Christmas tale. It features an original score by Wessel Odendaal and animation by Naret Loots, and is directed by Elizma Badenhorst. Venue: Studio Theatre, PieterToerien Theatre, MontecasinoCost: R130-R180Dates: Until January 6pietertoerien.co.za Garden of Lights at Emperors Palace There’s something unbeatably festive about colourful lights, and the Garden of Lights at Emperors Palace offers plenty of them this year. Wander through the twinkling displays, peek into Santa’s workshop, meet Christmas characters and end off at the fun fair, food stalls and Christmas Crafters’ Fair. Venue: Emperors PalaceCost: R25, family package of fiveR100Dates: Until January 2tickets.tixsa.co.za/event/garden-of-lights-18 Summer Sunsets at the Radisson Blu Spend the evening lazing by the pool, enjoying sundowners and live music. What better way to ease into the holidays? Venue: Radisson Blu Hotel,SandtonDates: Until December 28radissonblu.com New Year’s Eve Movies in the Park This family-friendly New Year’s Eve event is a chilled way to welcome 2019. Pack a picnic and spend the last few hours of the year enjoying an outdoor screening of children’s animated films in the afternoon while the grown-up movies start after dark — not that they are X-rated. The one with the most votes on Facebook currently is Love, Actually. The night will end with a fireworks display. Venue: Riversands Farm VillageCost: Under-twos free, thereafterR50-R300picnicsinthepark.co DURBAN Trail of Lights at Botanic Gardens This year 250,000 bulbs will make up the Trail of Lights around the gardens. Explore the colourful installations with a Christmas theme and enjoy a bite to eat, live music and a browse through the market at the end — all in support of local charities. Venue: Durban Botanic GardensCost: Under-twos free, R50 pre-booked, R70 at the doorDates: December 14 to 30trailoflights.co.za Litchi Festival Pick your own litchis in Salt Rock. Entrance tickets get you a tractor ride and as many litchis as you can eat while picking, and you can take home 1.6kg. Round off your activities with a picnic under the trees. Venue: The Litchi Orchard, Salt RockCost: R150, under-threes R30; cash onlyDates: Until January 2; closedDecember 25 and January 1lifewithheidie.com/litchi-picking Umgeni Steam Railway Take a nostalgic choo-choo trip. With special themed trips for the festive season, including a Santa Train and Carols by Candlelight, it’s an outing for all members of the family. The train, from Kloof to Inchanga, is run by a nonprofit organisation dedicated to preserving the heritage of railways in KwaZulu-Natal. At the Inchanga stop, passengers disembark for a picnic and to browse through a craft market and the museum in the stationmaster’s house. Venue: Trains depart from Kloof stationCost: Adult R260, children 2-12R190, pensioners R190Dates: Variousumgenisteamrailway.com ‘Cinderella’ Staged by the inimitable Kickstart Theatre Company and its talented duo of Steven Stead and Greg King, this year’s pantomime promises to be as magical as ever. Gorgeous sets and beautiful baroque costumes ensure it will be a feast for the eyes, while the show’s stars sing and dance up a storm. Venue: Elizabeth Sneddon TheatreCost: R135Dates: Until January 6kickstarttheatre.co.za PLETTENBERG BAY Plett Polo International When in Plett, do as the locals do and take in a polo match. This one’s between SA and Ireland. Put on your glad rags and enjoy an afternoon of stomping divots and socialising, with a fabulous after-party that will feature The Kiffness and The Kevin Floyd Project. Venue: Kurland EstateCost: VariousDate: December 29plettpolo.co.za Plett Summer Colour Run This 5km run/walk/skip is certainly fun. Three colour stations along the route will shower you in colour while DJs play the latest beats to keep you upbeat. A T-shirt, sachet of colour powder and entry to the festival zone are included in the price. There will be a glitter start to get proceedings under way, a giant inflatable slide and a dodgeball arena. Venue: Main BeachCost: R260. Early bird: R150 (under-10s free)Date: December 30summerrun.co.za/plett-2018